# API-INTEGRATION-AND-DATA-VISUALIZATION

**COMPANY**: CODTECH IT SOLUTIONS

**NAME**: AJINKYA ASHOK SURYAWANSHI 

**INTERN ID**: CT08JOL

**DOMAIN**: Python Programming

**BATCH DURATION**:  January 5th, 2025 to February 5th, 2025

**MENTOR NAME**: NEELA SANTHOSH

Fetching data from a public API and visualizing it using Python is a crucial skill in data analysis, Internet of Things (IoT) applications, and software development. In this project, you will integrate the 
OpenWeatherMap API to retrieve real-time weather data and create insightful visualizations using Matplotlib and Seaborn. APIs (Application Programming Interfaces) act as a bridge between different software 
applications, allowing us to access and exchange data seamlessly. OpenWeatherMap provides weather data in JSON format, which includes information such as temperature, humidity, wind speed, atmospheric pressure, 
and weather conditions. To begin, you need to create an account on OpenWeatherMap and generate an API key, which is essential for making API requests. Using the requests library in Python, you will fetch live 
weather data based on city names, geographic coordinates, or other parameters. Once the data is retrieved, it needs to be processed and structured using the Pandas library to enable easy manipulation and 
analysis. Data processing includes converting timestamps into human-readable formats, handling missing values, and extracting relevant details for visualization. Once the data is structured, visualization 
techniques come into play. Using Matplotlib, you can create line charts to track temperature variations over time, bar charts to compare weather parameters across different cities, and scatter plots to analyze 
correlations between temperature, humidity, and pressure. Seaborn, a powerful visualization library built on top of Matplotlib, allows the creation of advanced statistical plots such as heatmaps, violin plots, 
and pair plots. A heatmap, for instance, can be used to represent temperature variations across multiple locations, making it easier to interpret complex datasets. Additionally, box plots can be employed to 
understand the distribution of weather parameters, highlighting variations and outliers. By leveraging these visualization tools, you will gain valuable insights into weather patterns, seasonal trends, and 
climate behavior across different regions. To enhance the usability of your project, you can integrate these visualizations into an interactive dashboard using Streamlit or Dash. A dashboard provides an 
intuitive and user-friendly interface where users can input a city name or a date range and instantly view graphical representations of weather trends. This makes the project more dynamic, allowing real-time 
interaction and exploration of data. Additionally, adding features such as drop-down menus, sliders, and live updates can further improve the dashboard's functionality. A well-designed visualization dashboard 
not only presents data in an engaging way but also enables users to draw meaningful conclusions at a glance. This project is particularly valuable for those interested in data science, IoT, or web development, 
as it covers key aspects of real-world data handling. Learning how to integrate APIs teaches you how to work with external data sources, while visualization techniques help in making data more understandable and 
actionable. In real-life applications, such skills are widely used in industries such as meteorology, environmental science, agriculture, smart city planning, and disaster management. For example, analyzing 
weather trends can help farmers make informed decisions about irrigation, while urban planners can use climate data to improve city infrastructure and energy efficiency. As part of your internship at CodTech IT 
Solutions, this project will serve as a comprehensive learning experience in Python programming, API integration, and data visualization. By the end of the project, you will have developed a fully functional 
Python script capable of retrieving and analyzing weather data and an interactive visualization dashboard that presents this data effectively. Your final deliverable will include a well-documented Python script 
explaining the API calls, data extraction, processing, and visualization steps. Additionally, your dashboard will demonstrate your ability to convert raw data into meaningful insights, making it a valuable 
addition to your professional portfolio. Upon successful completion of this project, a completion certificate will be issued on your internship end date at CodTech IT Solutions, recognizing your achievement and 
expertise in API integration and data visualization. This certificate will serve as official proof of your technical skills and practical experience, which can be showcased to future employers or educational 
institutions. Furthermore, the knowledge gained from this project will be applicable in various domains, including finance, healthcare, business analytics, and IoT development. Whether you aim to become a data 
analyst, software developer, or machine learning engineer, the ability to collect, process, and visualize data is a fundamental skill that will greatly enhance your career prospects. By working on this project, 
you will also gain experience in debugging API requests, handling API response errors, and implementing best practices for data visualization. Understanding how to deal with missing or inconsistent data is a 
crucial aspect of data science, and this project will provide hands-on experience in dealing with such challenges. Additionally, you will develop a deeper understanding of how APIs function, including request 
methods like GET and POST, authentication mechanisms, and response handling techniques. You will also explore how to automate data retrieval at regular intervals, which is useful for real-time monitoring 
applications.

# OUTPUT OF THE TASK

![Image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/476ba42a-0bb7-49d6-9543-d76cc83793a0)
![Image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/57e865d8-9aa4-43ea-8a4e-a5ab7cbaff6d)
